#summary The best answers to the Frequently Asked Questions on the GWT group can be found here.
#labels Type-FAQ

= Google-Widget-Toolkit group FAQ =

This FAQ contains answers to questions often encountered on the [http://groups.google.com/group/Google-Web-Toolkit GWT newsgroup].

== Quick questions ==

=== _How do I call a GWT Java or JSNI method from javascript?_ ===

A: You can't do that directly, you must set up a 'hook'. For example:
{{{
    native void setupHookForJavascript() /*-{
        $wnd.myJavaMethod = function(param1, param2) {
            $this.@com.whatever.Whatever::myJavaMethod(ILjava/lang/String;)(param1, param2);
        };
    }-*/;
}}}

Call that method as soon as you can, in your !EntryPoint, and from that point onwards, any JavaScript code can just call your Java method using `myJavaMethod(param1, param2);`. See the [http://code.google.com/webtoolkit/documentation/com.google.gwt.doc.DeveloperGuide.JavaScriptNativeInterface.html JSNI Documentation] for more information.

=== _Why doesn't google use GWT?_ ===

Google actually does use GWT! Many Google products, such as Google Health, Google Mashup Editor, Google Base, and Google Checkout are all made with GWT. It's true that Google Reader and GMail don't use GWT, but GWT had not yet been developed when they were first built.

== In-Depth Articles ==

  * [ServerPushFAQ Server Push] - a method for sending events asynchronously from your server to GWT.

  * [PathsHandlingFAQ How GWT handles paths] - Read this if you're getting 'can't find file' errors from GWT.

  * [LoginSecurityFAQ Login Security] - Basic treatise on writing your login system in a secure fashion.

  * [StubbingRPC Stubbing RPC for hosted mode] - How to stub RPC servlets to make deployment a breeze while making hosted mode testing simple and easy.

  * [IntegratingWithSpring Integrating GWT with Spring 2.0]

  * I'd like to unit test my server's email facility: Use [http://quintanasoft.com/dumbster/ Dumbster] - it's a fake SMTP server written in java that stores the email it would have sent so your testing utility can check it.