#summary DRAFT What are the current features included in incubator?
 
We are very lucky to have a great group of engineers that contribute to the incubator project,without them none of this could happen.  A special thanks to  Freeland Abbott, Ray Cromwell, Jason Essington, Daniel Florey,  John Labanca, Fred Sauer, Bob Vawter,  Noam Wolf, and Jamie Yap for all their dedicated work.

== Widgets ==
We have a variety of small widgets percolating in incubator right now,  we've highlighted some of them below.
  * DatePicker, a fully internationalized and extensible date picking widget.
  * GlassPanel, exactly what is sounds, very useful to produce translucent effects. 
  * FastTree, a fully customizable tree with a rich event model.
  * SliderBar/ProgressBar/[Spinner], A set of really useful widgets to add zazz to your project. 
 
== Tables ==
We have developed a [Tables gwt table suite] which includes:
  * Bulk rendering of tables(up to 10x faster then normal rendering).
  * Scrolling tables, where the footer and header are fixed.
  * Paging tables, where the table can page through arbitrary data sets.
  * Editable tables, complete with common cell editors.
 
== Logging ==
We have a developed a  [Logging gwt logging suite] as well, which includes:
  * Logging levels based on java's logging system.
  * Categories and filters to narrow logging output.
  * A native java mode for shared code, where the output can be integrated with your server logging system.
  * Compilation options so logging can be completely removed or minimally included for production mode.
  * A variety of logging handlers that output to everything from firebug to a GWT tree widget.

== Css support ==
For those of you that use css  heavily, you know the trade-offs between readable/modular `css` and `css` that is efficient to download. With CssResource your `css` source files can be fully commented and modularized, because in production all css files are 
  * Stripped of comments and white space.
  * Aggregated into a single html file.
  * (And in an advanced configuration)
    * Obfucated css style names
    * Unused css rules eliminated
    * Rules selectively applied per browser.
 
== Graphics ==
Vector graphics have also made their way to the GWT Incubator. The GWTCanvas Widget exposes an API for drawing and transforming shapes and images, as well as for defining paths to create custom shapes. GWTCanvas currently supports:
 * Rotations, scales, and translations.
 * Custom paths including arcs, lines and curves.
 * Image drawing and transformation.
 * Compositing operations and transparency.