#summary Functionality currently included in the incubator

The following is a summary of widgets and libraries that are currently available in the GWT incubator.
 
== Widgets ==
  * [GlassPanel], exactly what is sounds, very useful to produce translucent effects]. 
  * [DropDownListBox], a fully customizable drop down list box.
  * [CollapsiblePanel], an easy and convinient panel to create hidable navigation panels.
  * [FastTree], a fully customizable tree with a rich event model.
  * [Spinner SliderBar/ProgressBar/Spinner/TimePicker/DateTimePicker], A set of really useful widgets to add zazz to your project. 
 
== Tables ==
  * [BulkTableRenderers] Bulk rendering of tables(up to 10x faster then normal rendering).
  * [ScrollTable Scrolling tables], where the footer and header are fixed.
  * [PagingScrollTable Paging tables], where the table can page through arbitrary data sets.
  * [PagingScrollTable Editable tables], complete with common cell editors.
 
== Logging ==
[Logging The  logging suite] provides additional logging capabilities, including:
  * Logging levels based on Java's logging system.
  * Categories and filters to narrow logging output.
  * A native java mode for shared code, where the output can be integrated with your server logging system.
  * Compilation options so logging can be completely removed or minimally included for production mode.
  * A variety of logging handlers that output to everything from firebug to a GWT tree widget.

== Css support ==
[CssResource] optimizes `css` source files for download, allowing them to be fully commented and modularized source, but quick and efficient in production. CssResource generates CSS that is: 
  * Stripped of comments and white space.
  * Aggregated into a single html file.
  * (And in an advanced configuration)
    * Obfucated css style names
    * Unused css rules eliminated
    * Rules selectively applied per browser.
 
== Graphics ==
The [GWTCanvas GWTCanvas Widget] exposes an API for drawing and transforming shapes and images, as well as for defining paths to create custom shapes. GWTCanvas currently supports:
 * Rotations, scales, and translations.
 * Custom paths including arcs, lines and curves.
 * Image drawing and transformation.
 * Compositing operations and transparency.
 
== Utilities == 
 * [Decorators html decorators which allow more flexible styling of your widgets]
 * [ServerSideLocale]