#summary Contributing to the GWT incubator project
#labels Type-Guide
= Making GWT Incubator Better =
This page explains how to develop with the gwt-incubator source.  

One of the most important things to remember is that gwt-incubator should be compiled against the most current *released* version of GWT. You can download the latest release of GWT for your platform [http://code.google.com/webtoolkit/download.html here].
 
== Setting up the incubator project ==

=== Get the source ===
 # Check out the following code from the gwt-incubator Subversion repository:
   # The GWT prerequisite tools and third party library code. Use `gwt/tools` directly if you have them installed. Otherwise download them here:
     {{{~/gwt-incubator$ svn checkout http://google-web-toolkit.googlecode.com/svn/tools/ tools}}}
   # Check out the Incubator source:
     {{{~/gwt-incubator$ svn checkout http://google-web-toolkit-incubator.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ trunk-read-only }}}

=== Build and test with ant ===

From the incubator directory, type {{{ ant -Dgwt.home=<path to your gwt jar> test }}}

If you are building gwt from source, the gwt.home argument will be something like {{{ -Dgwt.home=/home/you/src/gwt1.5/build/staging/gwt-mac-0.0.0 }}}

=== Setup for Eclipse ===

 # Follow the instructions [http://google-web-toolkit.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/eclipse/README.txt here] to set up your eclipse environment.
 # Create a variable named "GWT_INCUBATOR" pointing to your "gwt-incubator" folder
    # Window->Preferences->Java->Build Path->Classpath Variables
    # Click New...
    # Type GWT_INCUBATOR in the name field, and click the Folder... button.
 # Import the eclipse project
    # File->Import->Existing Projects into Workspace
    # Select your gwt-incubator directory
    # incubator should appear in the Projects list. Click Finish.
 # If you not on Windows, you will need to fix the gwt-dev project reference
    # Right click on the new incubator project in the explorer and choose Properties
    # Java Build Path
    # Under the Projects tab, replace gwt-dev-windows as appropriate

You now should be ready to go. 

=== Setup for other IDEs ===
We would much appreciate instructions here, if you are motivated to add them, add them as a comment below and I'll pull them up to this section.

== Contributing to Incubator ==
Before deciding to contribute source code to the incubator project, you should consider the questions below
  # Do you have a signed Google Contributors Agreement(found [http://code.google.com/webtoolkit/makinggwtbetter.html#clas here])?
  # Do you believe your source code should become part of the GWT code base?
  # Can you provide sample code, unit tests, and javadoc for the code you wish to submit? 
  # Does your source code work on Internet Explorer, !FireFox, Opera, and Safari? 
  # Are you willing, for the next couple of months following your code submission, to:  
    * Fix all critical bugs in your code
    * Answer outstanding design questions
If the answer to all the questions above is "yes", then your next step is to email 
Google-Web-Toolkit-Contributors@googlegroups.com with the subject line "Looking for Incubator sponsor for _synopsis of code_."

example:
  Looking for Incubator sponsor for DatePicker.

At this point someone who already is a committer to gwt-incubator must be willing to sponsor your code. You will work with the sponsor to get the code in shape for submittal.  You may then petition to become a committer to gwt-incubator.

=== The incubator reference project ===
GWT incubator contains its own reference project. This has a copy of the gwt museum source code.  

This project is right now set up directly for eclipse. To use it:
  # Ensure your gwt-incubator project is named "gwt-incubator" and exports all of its resources.
  # import the project defined in \reference. 
 You should now see a reference project and two launch configs, the `IncubatorMuseum` config includes all visual suites in the reference project. `SingleIssue` is a config to target a single issue, edit the `SingleIssue.gwt.xml` file.