#summary GWT UiBinder i18n use cases

Ray Ryan <br />
freely plagiarizing from the brilliant minds behind [http://code.google.com/p/gxp/ gxp]

This document explores internationalization use cases supported the GWT UiBinder. 

= Background =

The basic idea is that the localizable bits of your ui.xml template file are marked up as such. When the UiBinder code generator processes the template, it gathers these and creates an interface  extends com.google.gwt.i18.client.Messages. You then provide localized versions of these messages as you would for any other portion of your app. (See the Binding to Properties Files section of the [http://google-web-toolkit.googlecode.com/svn/javadoc/1.6/com/google/gwt/i18n/client/Messages.html Messages javadoc].)

Values for annotations that apply at the Messages interface level are set as attributes on the root element. Here is an example with all possible values set (normally you'd let some of these default).

{{{
<ui:UiBinder
  xmlns:ui='urn:ui:com.google.gwt.uibinder'

  ui:defaultLocale="en_us"
  ui:generateKeys="com.my.app.KeyGenerator"
  ui:generateFormat="com.my.app.MessageCatalogFormat1, com.my.app.MessageCatalogFormat2"
  ui:generateFilename="myapp_translate_source"
  ui:generateLocales="default"
> 
}}}

= Open Issues =

Support for Constants and ConstantsWithLookup is not yet designed.

PluralText is theoretically supported, but untested.

So far, I have found no use for Gxp's <ui:eph/> element. Is it really not needed, or do I just lack imagination?

Unannotated user visible text is allowed--a feature is needed to make this a compile time error.

= Complete sentence or headline with no internal tags. =

*Original*
{{{
<h1>User Account Management.</h1>
}}}

*Tagged* 
{{{
<h1>
  <ui:msg description="Title of UAM page">User Account Management.</ui:msg>
</h1>
}}}


*Generated*
{{{
public class MyUiBinderImpl implements MyUiBinder {
  static final MyUiMessages messages = GWT.create(MyUiMessages.class);

  void bindUi(MyUi myUi) {
    HTML html = new HTML();
    html.setHtml("<h1>" + messages.message1() + "</h1>");
    myUi.setElement(html.getElement());
  }
}

@DefaultLocale("en_US")
@GenerateKeys
@GeneratedFrom("com.foo.bar.MyUi.ul.xml")
public interface MyUiMessages extends com.google.gwt.i18.client.Messages {
  @DefaultMessage("User Account Management.")
  @Description("Title of UAM page")
  String message1();
}
}}}

This is the hello world case‚ a simple, unparametrized string.

= Simple HTML tags inside message =

*Original*
{{{
We <b>strongly</b> urge you to reconsider.
}}}

*Tagged* 
{{{
<ui:msg>We <b>strongly</b> urge you to reconsider.</ui:msg>
}}}

*Generated*

As above

Simple formatting is reasonable to put in front of a translator, and
so UiBinder supports html in messages, not just text.


= Messages with unclobberable portions =

*Original*
{{{
<!-- Uh oh, don't want translator to mess up brand CSS or the trademark span -->
<div><span class="brand">Colgate</span>, with MFP!<span class="tm">TM</span></div>
}}}

*Tagged* 
{{{
<div>
  <ui:msg description="blurb"><span class="brand" ui:ph="brandedSpan">Colgate</span>,
  with MFP!<ui:ph name="trademark"><span class="tm">TM</span></ui:ph></ui:msg>
</div>
}}}


*Generated*
{{{
public class MyUiBinderImpl implements MyUiBinder {
  static final String MESSAGE1_BRANDED_SPAN_OPEN = "<span class=\"brand\">";
  static final String MESSAGE1_BRANDED_SPAN_CLOSE = "</span>";
  static final String MESSAGE1_TRADEMARK = "<span class='tm'>TM</span>";
  static final MyUiMessages messages = GWT.create(MyUiMessages.class);

  static final MyUiMessages messages = GWT.create(MyUiMessages.class);

  public void bind(MyUi myUi) {
    HTML html = new HTML();
    html.setHtml("<div>"
      + messages.message1(MESSAGE1_BRANDED_SPAN_OPEN,
            MESSAGE1_BRANDED_SPAN_CLOSE, MESSAGE1_TRADEMARK)
      + "</div>");
  }
}

@DefaultLocale("en_US")
@Description("blurb")
@GenerateKeys
@GeneratedFrom("com.foo.bar.MyUi.ul.xml")
public interface MyUiMessages extends com.google.gwt.i18.client.Messages {
  @DefaultMessage("{0}Colgate{1}, with MFP!{2}")
  String message1(
    @Example(MyUiBinderImpl.MESSAGE1_BRANDED_SPAN_OPEN) String brandedSpanOpen, 
    @Example(MyUiBinderImpl.MESSAGE1_BRANDED_SPAN_CLOSE) String brandedSpanClose,
    @Example(MyUiBinderImpl.MESSAGE1_TRADEMARK) String trademark
  );
}
}}}

There are two examples in here. First, you see a {{{ui:ph}}} attribute that
can be added to any child of a {{{ui:msg}}}, to indicate that placholders
should be created to protect it from translators. Two placeholders are
created, for the opening and closing tags of the element (in this
case, brandedSpanOpen and brandedSpanClose).

Second, we see an element, also named {{{ui:ph}}}, that can surround an
arbitrary bit of markup to be protected in its entirety (in this case,
the trademark placeholder).

So, you have both an element *<ui:ph>*to surround untranslatable
runs*</ui:ph>*, and the <span *ui:ph*>attribute{{{<}}}/span> to put in
arbitrary elements to hide their begin and end tags from translators,
but keep their content as part of the message.


= Messages with runtime computed values =

*Original*
{{{
<!-- Java code will make calls like getClosingDate().setInnerText(closingDate()) -->

(closed <span ui:field="closingDate" /> through <span ui:field="reopeningDate"/>)
}}}

*Tagged* 
{{{
<ui:msg>
  (closed <span ui:field="closingDate" ui:example="7/12/2008" />
  through <span ui:field="reopeningDate" ui:example="7/19/2008" />)
</ui:msg>
}}}


Note that there is no {{{ui:ph}}} attribute here, which would normally
be used to identify a span as a placeholder, and also to provide its
name. The {{{ui:field}}} attribute's appearance inside a child of a
{{{ui:msg}}} element is enough to make it clear that a placeholder is
required, and the field name can be used as the placeholder name.

The {{{ui:example}}} attribute is optional, and allows more useful
text to be provided in the @Example() attribute of the generated
Mesages interface (and hence to the translator). Without it, the
parameters here would both be annotated {{{@Example("<span/>")}}}