#summary GWT UI Binder Use Cases

= Introduction =

This document provides various use cases for the use of the UiBinder, a proposed service to generate Widget and DOM structures from XML markup.

= Background =

There are problems with the declarative ui template binder as it was [DeclarativeUi originally proposed]

  * A template-based UI must be istantiated via GWT.create(), causing an implementation detail to be visible as public api
  * within a template, only widgets with a zero arg constructor can be used
  * ClientBundles cannot be used

In addressing these issues, we have talked about encouraging a proxy style of use (basically, use Composite to wrap whatever widget gets GWT.create()'d), but dislike the extra object creation implied. We also hope for a system that can choose to use innerHTML, cloning, or DOM assembly as makes sense per browser type. These shortcomings could be addressed by a combination of developer discipline (yuck) and perhaps the builder pattern, but we still found ourselves faced with the likelihood of wrapping a generated object.

Emily hit upon the idea of the Configurator (here rechristened UiBinder). It’s like a factory, but responsible for filling in the fields of a Widget (or other object) that someone else instantiates, rather than instantiating one itself. This seems to offer all the benefits of a builder, with no concerns of extra object creation, and as a nice side effect avoids a lot of boilerplate. This document illustrates its application in various use cases.

{{{
/**
 * Interface implemented by classes that generate DOM and widget
 * structures from ui.xml template files. Put the {@link Template}
 * annotation  on a UiBinder class declaration to point the code
 * generator at the right ui.xml file.
 */
interface UiBinder<T> {

  /**
   * Create a new UI and inject it into the given owner.
   * Elements marked in the template by g:field will be
   * assigned to like named fields or setter methods
   * in owner.
   */
  bindUi(T owner);
}

/**
 * Extends UiBinder to provide separate calls to create the root
 * of the UI, and to bind the UI. This allows fancy implementations
 * to support deferred instantiation.
 *
 * <p>Calling the inherited bindUi(owner) method is the same
 * as calling bindRest(createRoot(), owner);
 */
interface ForkedUiBinder<R, O> extends UiBinder<O> {
  /**
   * Return the root element defined in the template,
   * possibly empty. The type R must match the root
   * element in the ui.xml template file.
   */
  R createRoot();

  /**
   * Given a ui root from a previous call to createRoot(),
   * install it into owner. Elements marked in the
   * template by g:field will be assigned to like named
   * fields or setter methods in owner.(If creation of
   * root's contents were deferred, they will be
   * instantiated now.)
   */
  bindRest(R root, O owner);
}
}}}

= Hello World =

Make a simple generated UI, with a named element, and without widgets.

{{{
<!-- HelloWorld.ui.xml -->

<span xmlns:g='package://com.google.gwt.user.client.ui'>
  Hello, <span g:field="nameSpan"/>.
</span>

public class HelloWorld extends UIObject { // Could extend Widget instead

  @Template("HelloWorld.ui.xml")
  interface MyUiBinder implements UiBinder<HelloWorld> {}
  private static MyUiBinder uiBinder = GWT.create(MyUiBinder.class);

  protected SpanElement nameSpan;

  public HelloWorld(String name) {
    // call setElement(), set nameSpan
    uiBinder.installUi(this);
    nameSpan.setInnerText(name);
  }
}

// Use:

SpanElement helloWorld = new HelloWorld("World").getElement();
}}}

= Hello Composite World =

Make a simple widget-based UI

{{{
<!-- HelloWidgetWorld.ui.xml -->

<g:HTMLPanel xmlns:g='package://com.google.gwt.user.client.ui'>
  Hello, <g:ListBox g:field="listBox"/>.
</g:HTMLPanel>

public class HelloWidgetWorld extends Composite {

  @Template("HelloWidgetWorld.ui.xml")
  interface MyUiBinder implements UiBinder<HelloWidgetWorld> {}
  private static MyUiBinder uiBinder = GWT.create(MyUiBinder.class);

  protected ListBox listBox;

  public HelloWidgetWorld(String... names) {
    // call initWidget(), set listBox
    uiBinder.bind(this);
    for (String name : names) { listBox.addItem(name); }
  }
}

// Use:

HelloWidgetWorld helloWorld =
  new HelloWidgetWorld("able", "baker", "charlie");
}}}